---
title: "Apache Hive : RCFile"
date: 2024-12-12
---

# Apache Hive : RCFile

RCFile (Record Columnar File) is a data placement structure designed for MapReduce-based data warehouse systems. Hive added the RCFile format in version 0.6.0.

RCFile stores table data in a flat file consisting of binary key/value pairs. It first partitions rows horizontally into row splits, and then it vertically partitions each row split in a columnar way. RCFile stores the metadata of a row split as the key part of a record, and all the data of a row split as the value part.

RCFile combines the advantages of both row-store and column-store to satisfy the need for fast data loading and query processing, efficient use of storage space, and adaptability to highly dynamic workload patterns.

* As row-store, RCFile guarantees that data in the same row are located in the same node.
* As column-store, RCFile can exploit column-wise data compression and skip unnecessary column reads.

A shell utility is available for reading RCFile data and metadata: see [RCFileCat]({{< ref "rcfilecat_30748712" >}}).

For details about the RCFile format, see:

* Javadoc for [RCFile.java](http://hive.apache.org/javadocs/r1.0.1/api/org/apache/hadoop/hive/ql/io/RCFile.html)
* the 2011 ICDE conference paper "[RCFile: A Fast and Space-efficient Data Placement Structure in MapReduce-based Warehouse Systems](http://www.cse.ohio-state.edu/hpcs/WWW/HTML/publications/papers/TR-11-4.pdf)" by Yongqiang He, Rubao Lee, Yin Huai, Zheng Shao, Namit Jain, Xiaodong Zhang, and Zhiwei Xu.

 

 

 

